# Minutes of Meeting 1, 2020-08-24, 16:00–17:30 UTC

* via Google Meet
* Host: Dave Crossland
* Facilitator: Liang Hai
* Note taker: Dave Crossland, Caleb Maclennan, et al.

This meeting is conducted according to ISO policies and Code of Conduct, see https://www.iso.org/resources.html

## Resolutions

*Resolved*: Create a W3C Community Group with the name “Font and Text Community Group”, identifier “font-text”, and description:

> “The Font and Text Community Group gathers individuals and organisations to discuss and develop specifications and implementations for technologies such as shaping and layout which operate on and at the interface between text encoding and font formats.”

  * Action item for Florian Rivoal: Click the button of the application form. (Done.)

## Attendees
34 people were attending at 16:50 UTC (approximately half way through the call)

Adam Twardoch, Alan Stearns, Andrew Glass, Behdad Esfahbod, Benjamin Yang, Bobby de Vas, Caleb Maclennan, Christopher Chapman, Frederick Brennan, David Corbett, Elika Etemad (fantasai), Eric Muller, Erwin Denissen, Florian Rivoal, Gary Sullivan, Jean-Baptiste Morizot , John Hudson, Jonathan Kew, Laurence Penney, Liang Hai, Makoto MURATA, Martin Hosken, Nathan Willis, Ned Holbrook, Norbert Lindenberg, Peter Constable, Renzhi Li, Roderick Sheeter, Sairus Patel, Simon Cozens, Thomas Phinney, Toshiya Suzuki, Vladimir Levantovsky, Zachary Quinn Scheuren

## Minutes

1. Review the last meeting’s minutes

Erratum:

> … Also, W3C has a different policy; If you have IP and you propose it, the moment you propose it, you make that IP available free of charge. …

* Elika Etemad / fantasai has pointed out:

> This is incorrect. CGs are contribution-based, but Working Group Members are obligated to the contents of a specification only after it has been published into the official spec and, except for the first public working draft which has a longer period, only after a 60-day exclusion period triggered by either a patent review draft publication or resignation of the member.

Discussion:

* Liang: OK, item 1. It was said that at W3C, IPR proposed is made royalty free at that moment, but fantasai pointed out that isn't true, I invite her to speak to that.
* Fantasai: WG and CGs are different. CGs patent policies are weaker, based on contribution. WG policy is based on participation, and has an exclusion period to exclude parents based on what was published before that exclusion. The WG policy is that all companies in the WG sign off on the work of the WG. No need to track what is contributed by whom, because patent commitments are by every participant to the spec as a whole.
* Florian: The entire WG commits the IP, but the obligation to license material that was not excluded ONLY kicks in when the spec is sufficiently mature. The precise definition is a detailed topic, but that is the gist.
* Liang: Got it. I have more familiarity with the W3C process and WG vs CGs. Next, Peter C?

2. Schedule the next meeting

* Continue to use 4 week interval, same time and place

3. New participants to self-introduce

    * Florian Rivoal: I am here personally but I’m on the w3c Advisory Board, co-editor of the W3C Process, and worked on the recent W3C Patent Policy update. Technically involved mostly in the CSSWG.
    * Elika J. Etemad aka fantasai: W3C CSSWG / W3C Advisory Board / co-editor CSS Text, Inline Layout, Writing Modes, Ruby Layout, and other layout specs; and also W3C Process
    * Gary Sullivan: ISO/IEC JTC1 SC29 chair nominee
    * Alan Stearns: Adobe, co-chair of the CSS Working Group.
    * Sairus Patel: Work at Adobe on fonts & text
    * Bobby de Vos: I work at SIL (?)
    * John Hudson: I’m at Tiro Typeworks and design type and write long emails :)
    * Eric Muller: I’ve worked on OT for 23 years
    * JJB Morizot: I’m a french type design, here to listen
    * Martin Hosken: SIL International, Graphite lead. Have written various OT proposals.
    * Laurence Penney: Mostly to listen. My work on Axis-Praxis, FauxFoundry and Samsa have all been “blank slate” implementations of (parts of) OpenType based on the spec. While identifying a bug in Apple’s implementation, I clarified the specification of IUP in OT variations. Support independent implementers!


7. Summarize other topics from the past month’s discussions in the MPEG-OTSPEC mailing list
    * Liang: Great, it's under 2 minutes. As you see last time we had a lot of whining, suggestions, and we agreed to use the MPEG AHG mailing list as a temporary venue for discussion. The list has tonnes of emails. You can join the list at  https://lists.aau.at/mailman/listinfo/mpeg-otspec and see the archive there. What else was valuable? (no one says anything) So lets nail down the scope of what we want to do and the org structure for this group, be it at ISO, W3C, or elsewhere. So I’d like to invite summaries of the discussions. If you participated in topics on the mailing list, please summarize.
    * DC: I nominate Vlad to summarize, as the AHG chair. But Vlad, have you read everything on the list?
    * Behdad: I object, Vlad didn’t tell me how to file a complaint.
    * Vlad: I don't know how to do it.

4. Scope (Also including item 5. Process)
    * Vlad: So we have 2 sides to this, there is the ‘exploration discussions’ for a wider scope that is not immediately belonging to font format standards and is technically very relevant, and so can’t be considered as a separate topic, it should be a joint activity. So we have this group with many new members;, sometimes they overlap, other times they are quite far. So we should keep that in mind when considering different activities/topics, some may be better  talke elsewhere. So eg a venue should be considered as a table of needs, requirements, and scopes, rather than personal opinions.
    * Chris Chapman: Liang, what is the scope you wanted to do here?
    * Liang: I want a larger scope that covers the script shaping aspects, I pitched it half jokingly as “WHAT WG for text shaping” as WHAT-WG was a very successful effort to move the web platform forwards.
    * Gary Sullivan: So this is NOT a meeting of the AHG?
    * Vlad: I can answer that. I believe everyone here is a member of the AHG. So yes, it's happening among AHG members.
    * GS: Was it announced as a meeting of the MPEG ad hoc group? Or something else?
    * Vlad: It is not announced as under the AHG mandate.
    * GS: I am not clear about who is meeting here? What organization is this?
    * DCrossland: It's an unincorporated meeting of the public.
    * GS: So it's not chaired by the AHG chair, it's not producing a report to be reviewed by MPEG?
    * Liang: Yes
    * Vlad: Yes
    * GS: Thanks for clarifying that it is NOT a AHG meeting.
    * Liang: Right, we want a place to discuss scope, and the AHG mailing list exists with many relevant subscribers. That list happens to be used for OFF MPEG standardization. Vlad welcomed us as the chair there, and he is trying hard to make sure discussions, albeit informal, do remain under the procedural umbrellas to sphere are no expected situations, especially legally. .. So we are an informal group of people with interest to improve fonts and text state of the art, and we are learning about ISO procedures as they are part of the situation
    * Vlad: we are taking advantage of the AHG, but nothing else
    * Liang: So, 2 major topics, 1) scope, and 2) org structure and process. What will we do, and where and how will we do it? Also Please announce your name and then talk! :)
    * Thomas Phinney: Dave C’s summary was my understanding: that this is a meeting of interested parties, with no current organizational affiliation. (Even if everyone attending is also an AHG member.)
    * Simon Cozens (currently on a bus): Vlad invited us to use the AHG mailing list as a temporary forum to discuss this WG, not to be subsumed into the AHG! Key discussions were: whether we want to (or even can) separate discussion of shaping from the font format itself, which led to discussions of the maintenance of the font format. Patent issues - these need to be freely discussable, as a forum where questions of patent applicability and infringement are not welcome is hostile to libre software implementers. And there was basically a lot of light (and not very much heat) about the nature of ISO processes, ad hoc groups, MPEG relationship to other groups, etc. I think key deliverables for the group, in my opinion, are concrete documentation (leading towards a standard) for the text shaping process.
    *  Norbert: Can we separate “scope and process” into 2 tihngs
    * Liang: I have agenda item 6 above for MPEG OFF. But for our process we have item 5 and scope is item 4.
    * Vlad: Right, there is text shaping, and then there iis ‘improvement modifications and updates to current opentype / open font format spec’. ISO SubCommittee 29, Working Group 3, MPEG SYstems, has been therefore for 18 years, and I don't expect this to change. For text shaping, that is an important and formal part, that NEEDS to be specified, we all see the lack of formal docs for script shaping, we all want to do it, so the goal is to jointly come up with a well defined scope for that activity. And then we can look at the best venue for that.
    * N: Yese, thanks for separating scope and process.
    * DC: *reads out thomas and simons’ comments above*
    * Peter C: 2 scopes were brought up, but I see 3 scopes here: 1 font formats, 2 what I call ‘line layout and shaping’, and 3rd, ‘page and block layout issues.’ And I think this distinction is useful because OTOH, there are different agencies that lend themselves best to different work. For 2, that is tightly coupled to the Unicode model for those scripts, so Unicode Consortium may be the best umbrella for that activity. But Unicode is not covering higher level layout; UTS50 recommends how text is orientated in vertical text layout, utt that it's just a starting point for vertical layout. There are many other known issues, and a lot more work has to happen, and HAS happened on the w3c site. So those can tie into (1). Let's remember there are various formats people can be interested in. We can assume OT/OFF as its widely used, but there is also SIIL Graphite and Apple AAT, so details around shaping may need to be generalized than especially assumed to the OT context.
    * Liang: Thanks Peter, I let you run over 2 mins :) Behdad?
    * Behdad: I think it's premature to talk about scope, we don't have a working way to develop the format. So scope and individual tech matters must come after working together. I clearly believe the ad hoc process does not work. So where to land is key. Gerg H is not here. I see 2 ways. MS can contribute OT to a new effort. Or, ISO can contribute OFF. That has to be figured out first.
    * Liang: OK, sure, I see that unlike last time, we need to set a scope to decide which org can take us in. We need to have a business plan to explain what we are going to do. Then we could be a w3C CG, that can work, let's discuss it later. Then behdad said the current process is not working well, and I think we can discuss that in wiring. Personally the mailman email list is very difficult to keep up to date with, it's hard to follow different threads. It was hard to get everyone the meeting URL and the time right.
    * John Hudson: 2 minutes starting now :) So its chicken and egg, process to define scope, scope to define process. It is a large scope! I Like Peter's 3 area breakdown. But we are focused on 2 areas significantly, and orgs are already segmented. So Addressing that segmentation is a goal. There are different orgs for different aspects of text shaping and encoding and layout. So if you want to do something you need to span all groups. Nortbert picked up what I said in email, what process do we want? And then we look for orgs that have the right patent policy, the right communication forums, that we will be comfortable in?
    * Liang: I like using q+ in chat if you want the floor, thanks Fantasai for proposing this.
    * Eric Muller: I agree with Behdad that we need clarification of scope. Well established company employees need a formal org. An issue that plagued us is the separation of fonts, Unicode, document format, and shaping engine. Each person knows 1 piece and tries to solve ALL in the piece they know. So I am NOT in favor of breaking issues in various areas. We need to fix Unicode, or CS, or font format. We need to align them all very well.
    * Liang: Right, I agree.
    * Dave: So the term OpenType keeps getting thrown around but it is kind of fuzzy definition at this point. We need to remember when we use that term that Microsoft holds a trademark on OpenType; it’s their format and to some extent when using that term we’re guests in their house. OT has acted as upstream to ISO OFF. Perhaps a third more open, community-driven thing is needed, as an upstream.
    * Liang: After Fredderic Brennan, I’d like to take up Florian’s offer to explain the Wg/Cg differences.
    * FB: I don't need 2 mins, I want to speak to the mailing list issue Liang mentioned. I agree, I don’t know who controls it. A lot of us get bounce messages and I and 2 others said they got kicked off. It's an issue. For scope, I agree w behdad, i come at this the way same, i see an issue where MS has control over this process, yet seem not to have given to the larger community, so harfbuzz is “the standard” now, which is better than ‘whatever uniscribe did’ but I see the point that ISo and MS have a stranglehold over the process. So certainly we need to come up with a way to recommend changes to the font format. I hear ideas about a totally different font format. As DCrossland said, OpenType(r) is a trademark.
    * Renzhi Li: I point out that the focus is often web, but it's also a font format for office, design apps, and industry uses out of our vision. So THEIR demands must be considered too. And they are not open or cutting edge. They want stability. That is a big concern of the format - to work everywhere, for every person.
    * Peter C: I follow Eric and ? saying. I see 3 scopes, they lend themselves to some org contexts, but I don't mean to imply that they should be worked on in independent orgs. We do need to coordinate them in a close relationship. That can happen with a single org, but can happen across orgs. Some people are focused on 1 aera. He calls out harfbuzz as a de facto reference implementation. Bt that is just rendering; nothing to do with page/block layout. He’s focused in 1 area. So people will be focused on 1 area, like shaping. That is a major gap in specs since OT was made in the 1990s. It is an area ripe for more specification. But there is another group, e.g. vertical layout concerns. It's another group, with different issues.
    * Liang: Last comment on scope from Vlad, then we’ll move on.
    * Vlad: A few comets, ... a more productive environment can be found with focus, having different orgs where expertise is present and communication between orgs that allows formalized things like w3c and ISO as a formal liaison relationship is the best way to organize the work itself. There are e.g. topics like relationships between OT and OFF, whoever brought that up, we have a 16 year history of what  I see as a successful relationship. In 2004, MS transferred all ownership of OT to ISO to carry it forwards, except the registered TM ‘opentype’ word itself. It was a source of confusion, a lamented thing, to specify 1 thing. But that will not go away soon. So an attempt to override it all with a 3rd name, I don't see how that is helpful.
    * Liang: It isn’t to come up with a 3rd name.
    * Vlad: I think we will spend a lot of energy on something we can better spent elsewhere.
    * Liang: The reason we are here is to improve the situation, to patch up the gaps and problems that are clearly there. OFF and OT spec has done GREAT on, we are all grateful for that. But we want to address missing pieces. Personally I find the w3c CG proposal as promising. So I’d like to come to a consensus about that. I want Florianto explain. THis is important.
    * Florian: W3C CGs are easy to understand. A CG has mailing list and  a simple patent policy, what you contribute is licensed. You can (and typically do) set up a github repo as well. A CG is typically used when you have an idea, but you aren’t sure if it has merit, or to build up a community to support the technical proposal community. This seems beyond that stage, we could be a CG yes, but a WG is the more formal venue. The full patent policy, appeals possess, formal liaisons with other standards bodies, visibility into other industries (not just web). For example, CSS is used for paper books by many people. W3C also has a liaison with ISO, and so there is a way to ratify W3C standards at ISO. That reminds me of how the informal ad hoc task force here, and that 2 stage thing can and has been done at w3c. To get the benefit of w3c, if this community agrees, then that is for a WG. is only a little more than having a github repo.
    * Fantasai: Some CGs manage fine, but given the opentype community seeing disputes, a formal W3C process will help build trust. And w3c staff time will be available to the W group, but not a C group.
    * Liang: The patent protection in w3c is attractive to me, even for a CG.
    * Fantasai: It's a Github repo with a patent policy. Often ideas come from people who are not patent holders, but a formal WG covered everyone in the group.
    * Liang: How does one agree with the patent policy of a CG?
    * Fantasai: You just join, to join you click a button.
    * Florian: You need 5 people for a CG, but for a WG, you need to charter a group that is worth doing under those terms for the w3c to approve.
    * Dave: It does seem to me that we need to have a MD in a repo or at least a repo for specification text or sort of pre-proposals and stuff like that. W3C operates a lot of stuff on Github already. The MPEG group also has one, and the need to contribute DOCX can be automated has been discussed. The CG or WG is this kind of t3rd place I talked about that can stream stuff down into the process. Might be something that OT / Apple TT can draw from. Also … I work at Google and Behdad is one of the authors of this proposal that we have on the table for COLR … I think it’s important to find a place we can consolidate. XKCD standards—try to avoid that.
    * Tom Phinney: I was voicing a preference for a formal WG
    * Norbert: I want to propose the Unicode Consortium as an alternative to w3c. Unicode can work fine and may be closer to text shaping. Unicode has 3 tech committees; the 1st is old fashion on the core standard. There’s also the CLDR and ICUGroups that are like software production groups. So forming a font group there will require defining our own process - but it allows us to define our own process.
    * Liang: Many do not know UTC is not all of Unicode.
    * J Hudson: Florian/Fantasai, are there examples of starting as a CGs that DIDN'T become a WG, that went to another org?
    * Florian: Yes, a few cases, don’t remember the exact tech, but 1 went to WHAT-WG, which is related to w3c for historical reasons but distinct from it, and there are other things that went to IETF. Offline HTTP for web resources that work offline with the semantics and security of HTTP. So yes, can and has.
    * JH: So w3c CG can be a good place for these discussions where we can work out scope and where to operate, do it informally, without any overheard of SC29, questions of is this a WG meeting, and we can just DO THE STUFF and then decide where to put it formally.
    * Florian: Right, I don’t know if that brings anything that the current group does not have, but the CG can be a temporary venue and you can go back to where you were before or go forward anywhere.
    * Liang: I am worried about patent submarine problems. W3c tools and github approach is cutting edge and highly efficient, so I think we can learn a lot there.
    * Vlad: So, we have a successful case in SVG-in-OT that started as CG, was there for 2 years,  before it came back to AHG and Microsoft OpenType(r). So, also, to answer the process of OFF updates, questions Dave Crossland added to the agenda, we can chat about that later.
    * Liang: If you have a great answer, jump in, but I’ll limit you to 2 mins
    * Vlad: Great! O so the AHG process iis established for years, it was tolerable so far. Thee proposal comes in, can be very informal, just an email ‘hhy this part, say a feature description, I want to improve it to say instead x’ or ‘i have a new table, this doc says what the table is, I want it added to OFF and to Microsoft OpenType spec.’ The ISO process says any change can only be made once we have followed a formal process to amend the standard as is, or make a new edition. If we can bundle a few changes, it's a smaller amendment. But the jump from v3 to v4 of the standard was the VF addition, it made the doc 100+ pages loger, so that's a good reason for a new edition. Since this is scheduled by ISO national bodies, we batch changes into amendments made infrequently. So we accumulate changes until there is enough to start an amendment. That is how it works.
    * Liang: OK, we have 19 mins left, Behdad and Makoto are in the Q, and then I’d like to poll for consensus to move to a w3c CG.
    * Behdad: SVG in OT was not a success. It failed to get major companies to implement for years, and still has major problems. It was by no means a success. So, for Unicode or other venue candidates like ICU, I also see problems where the process will remain ad hoc. So w3c is well established OUTSIDE the type industry, with PROVEN processes, that is what they bring to us. Unicode doesn't have any of that.
    * Makoto: I agree  with CG (mic issues)
    * Liang: What with? :) Well, it seems not everyone has strong opinions. But W3C CG seems to be a good thing, it can clarify that we are not part of the ISO WG or AHG situation if we renamed ourselves to “w3c CG”
    * Floriian: You describe it, post it on the w3c website, 5 people say they will join, and that’s it.
    * DCrossland: So it can be done today? Liang writes the description and 5 of us sign up and we are done by sundown? Is it automated?
    * Florian: It's mostly automated
    * Liang: I will draft something and call for objections.
    * Sarius: Is hard to agree without knowing the scope.
    * Peter: Sure, 5 people are needed to form a group, set a title and a paragraph.
    * Liang: We have about 30 people on this call, I will not move ahead unilaterally. We want consolidated discussions, we don’t want to spread things even further. We want to get agreement from all that there will be a central place.
    * Peter C: It needs to be formulated in the way that is LEAST committal, LEAST contentious. People ARE here, so I see an appetite for more discussion.
    * Liang: Yes, I will draft it inclusive and vague. Can we change the CG name?
    * Florian: Doable, shut it down and start fresh may be better as renaming mailing lists and so on will be a pain. The description is much easier to change. But the cost of being totally wrong is low.
    * Liang: And such a legacy mailing list/repo name is OK/
    * Fantasai: I propose just the slug is immutable, the label and desc can change.
    * Peter C: Simon posted this and it LGTM, "The Font and Text community group gathers individuals and organisations to discuss and develop specifications and implementations which operate at the interface between text encoding, shaping, layout and font formats."
    * (General wordsmithing)
    * Peter C: Let’s move on, we can refine this later on
    * Florian: I am looking at other reqs, we need a slug, lowercase, numbers, hyphen.
    * Liang: OK, let's figure that out offline too. For now, we agree to make a W3C CG to proceed? Name “Font and Text CG” and paragraph and slug to be determined.
    * DC: What about existing Fonts WG?
    * Vlad: The existing WebFonts WG (not Fonts WG) has a well defined charter and scope, and it is not "it"
    * DC: Fonts WG is dormant?
    * Roderick Sheeter: A full WG has a specific charter; this is not in scope for the existing group.
    * DC: OK so we may have 3 WGs at W3c for fonts, if we upgrade :)
    * Vlad: To upgrade, you need a well defined charter ,a list of things to delivery, and nothing else. So WebFonts WG can not just easily start doing something else.
    * Vlad: Right, the CG is much more informal and can be used to figure out what to charter. So, to clarify, as an active and long time ISO and w3C participant, I want to make sure we all understand and agree that the w3c process is NOT LIGHT. There are significant things, well defined described, well defined, if you want to know what they are, I’ll share the new sept 15th process that was recently approved. That explains hohw WG mode is v different to CG mode.
    * Fantasai: There is some flexibility in how WGs operate. We require decisions to be made by consensus, but some WGs use f2f and declare consensus three, others call for consensus on a mailing list and have a time limit. Others use both. Some allow a spec editor to decide. Others only allow the editor to follow the consensus. I can add a link for how CSS WG operated, but there is a requirement to address ALL comments, and a staff contact will help with the process and help the group learn standardization well.
    * Liang: That is a high bar we can not pass now, but CG is good to go.
    * Peter C: Who will fill the form?
    * Florian: I have already filled it in, I can click submit :)
    * (lol)
    * Liang: DO IT :D
    * Florian: I will paste the text into the chat here:
      > The Font and Text community group gathers individuals and organisations to discuss and develop specifications and implementations for technologies such as shaping and layout which operate on and at the interface between text encoding and font formats.
    * Peter C: We should post to the AHG maliting to announce it, and invite the list NO LONGER be used for THESE purposes.
    * Liang: Makes sense. Flirian, can you do this? Post a screenshot?
    * Vlad: A link is OK.
    * Liang: OK, time is up. Next meeting, same time in 4 weeks? Can we use the same Google Meet URL? (not sure) OK well I’ll keep the meeting information at the top of this agenda doc.
    * Vlad: Floriian, does W3C offer anything like a Zoom room?
    * Florian: Not usually, no. But perhaps for an exception?
    * Vlad: I’d like to request it as a favor
    * Florian: I can’t answer as I’m not here in an official capacity, but I will ask
    * ???: I like the time slot Doodle, to confirm this same time ini 4 weeks is good again for 90 minutes.
    * Vlad: Options over Monday/Tuesday? I’d prefer Tuesday as Monday is busy for me and I sacrificed W3C WebFonts WG meeting for this.
    * Liang: OK, one day later is good for me. Let’s use the Doodle voting thing.

6. AOB
    * Liang: I am a provisional facilitator for now, until we have a better process. We have an agenda and will follow up.
    * Dave Crossland: For Vlad: Peter Constable is commissioned by Google Fonts & Microsoft to update OpenType® specs with small known issues/fixes, and github.com/googlefonts/colr-gradients-spec. I’d like to hear from you, what is the current process for an update to the MS OpenType® spec to make its way into OFF? How should the MPEG AHG arrive at consensus? (https://lists.aau.at/pipermail/mpeg-otspec/2020-August/001987.html) If MPEG doesn’t meet the community’s needs for developing the projects below, what are the Pros and Cons of various standards bodies for doing so?
    * (Comment from Makoto: If we need a registry normatively referencable from the main spec, ISO/IEC might not be the best place. It is now too difficult to find a registration authority (not a SC or WG) since it has to pay the cost for liability insurance.)
    * Norbert Lindenberg asked: what are the chances of getting ISO to allow us to [require all all inputs be published] *by default*? (Comment from Makoto: In ISO, incorporating such changes to specifications always require ballots. Registration is different but see my comment above.)

8. Review the existing proposals

    * (Not discussed)

## Informal after-meeting chat

```
Lorp
I have tried to contribute to specs, there is a ‘meta spec’, things close to the spec, but isn’t part of it. Can that happen in a CG or WG?
Florian
Neither CG or WG mandate it. What is typical is a family of Github Repos, and if you have an issue, file a Github issue. So the Wg can be contributed to by non members.
Fantasai
Bugs in implementations usually have to go to their developers - Blink, WebKit, Gecko, etc. MS would accept MSIE bugs in its normal way. If you want to make a repo to track bugs elsewhere you could, but I don’t know people do it. 
Flirian
You can make a test suite, to finish a spec, that is done to demonstrate. So there exists places and infrastructure to do tests , and fonts it not just the web, so testing outside of the web, we’ll likely need to agree on new infrastructure, but yes, agreeing what will be tested against is important to do.
Lorp
It was working well for VF, we have test fonts that implementers tested with. 
Adam Twardoch
I want to briefly say that yes, what Lawrence says, “Can I Use”, etc. then there’s a difference in terms of life cycle, code, implementations. Browsers evolve quickly, bugs “Will Be” fixed, but for fonts, a value of collecting “can i use” data is that we KNOW certain WIDESPREAD implementations will NEVER fix some issues. So font makers need to know that three are limitations, known, that will remain ‘forever’, and you need to notify users... You tell vendor X that something is wrong in an old application? Well, good. But it's not being developed. So, the meta information, when I proposed COmmonType, its ‘documentation’ and the ’specification’ is just ONE aspect of it. Docs is a fully different and another matter. 
Vlad
Right, not everything is a Recommendation track deliverable. That is not the goal. 
Frederick Brennan
Can I ask a question that cuts to why I am in this group? I want to see Stroked Fonts in OpenType. It's something I've wanted for a while. I got an email from someone saying its already possible SVG in OT, using markers, you can make CJK stroke fonts. THe markers, line, path and markers are the custom end caps. With aCJK char desc lang, you can make stroke fonts in OT. But SVG in OT is something not well supported. So, is that the way to go? A new table? And there is nowhere to go to ask that question. So, for standards, is SVG in OT something we are in support of? Is that the answer, or not? 
Liang
Our scope will answer questions as a collective expertise group, as we know who knows the thing better than most others. So if you want to know what is the right path for you, we can be the people to answer that. To propose that to be integrated into some standard, to promote it for implementers.
Peter C
I have tried to call out in the past that simply discussing something, even getting into a spec, doesn't mean it is useful. You really want a process that gets different implementers to agree that the proposed spec makes sense and it is workable. So there is SOME chance that SOMEDAY they can support. So it is not UNWORKABLE, so they will NEVER ever be able to support iit. And also, that there is business value to them so they will go on to implement it. COlor fonts is a great case study: There was a business requirement for color fonts, but not interoperability. So one company made a format for their immediate needs, but it didn’t lead to the industry to have wide support for it, and then font makers will make fonts that work in a wide variety of endpoints. For VF, we did the opposite - to get all the major platform vendor companies to sit together and say ‘yes this make sense and we can support it in the future’ we didn't get a commitment for WHEN, but for the start we got people to say ‘yes, this is good, we probably will do something with it.
John Hudson
So, as Norbert said, the stakeholders who said they will support this, DO have a ‘bigger hammer’ than the rest of us. No way around that. But as a font maker, I spend 25 working years making fonts for a tech made by people OTHER than the people who make fonts. It has been frustrating. We went from a craft model of type making, to industrial phase where tech makers made type, and in last 30 years we accepted tech by OS makers and OFTEN when font makers come forward with ideas to make more interesting fonts, better ways to make fonts that do better things, we run up against a wall. So I hope the new CGH will address that balance in some respect. As lorp says, take ideas from those outside major stakeholders, and deo that thheyere is support, they can do good things, and that WILL hit the wall Peter says, what is the business
Dave
So it’s 2020, what I’m thinking will happen is Harfbuzz will get pull requests that implements this stuff that we’re talking about and many platforms will pull Harfbuzz in and some things will get implemented that way. And also from history I’m aware of SIL’s work and how Graphite made its way  into LibreOffice and maybe to some extent xetex.
Fred B
Firefox will move to WebKit and drop SIL Graphite
Renzhi Li
I think C/C++ is not great. Rust, Haskell, OCaml are better, so we can get verification that an implementation is correct. Several years ago in DWRite, we introduced a feature “can break shaping after” 
Peter C
It's a hint to the paragraph layout, that if you introduce a line break at X point, you have a sense how far back or fwd may be effece. 
RLi
That was introduced a few years ago, and MS Word uses it a lot. But I do not have confidence about our implementation’s correctness. I am not sure we will never hit an edge case that breaks everything. So a reference implementation in a formal language, we can ask experts to PROVE it is correct. That is important for the reference implementation.
Adam Twardoch
With VF, we had for the first time the algo IN THE SPEC. A piece of code, pseudo code, not sure what language, 
Peter
….
It would be great of MS open sourced OTLS ...
RLi
If we introduce a breaking change, there are 2 levels, a format break, and an API break. 32 bit GIDs will break DirectWrite and CoreText. They explicitly define  that GIDs are uint16. So, A LOT Of software internals need to be updated for a 32 bit GID format. That is a key concern of the evolution of the format.
PeterC
Right, Windows APIs have character to glyph mapping that assumed a 1:1, and did not accommodate unicode variation sequences, supplementary planes. But it survived. So they CAN be survivable. But a specific change can be big enough, yes. 32 bit GIDs will be a big undertaking. Not impossible. But we need to know the costs and impacts and figure out what the right compatibility story will be. That is why the STAT table was made. We need a way for existing apps to make sense of a VF that has a VF with a design space than W/W/S(or italic).
Adam
VF changes were ‘breaking’, and especially for CFF2. They are unrenderable in ALL existing applications developed up until then. It has been done! :) There are SPLIT feelings about CFF2, yes, but it is something that does NOT require.... SVG says you also need a CFF or GLYF table, but CFF2 requires no fallback. So, it has happened :)
RLi
So if we want GID features, 32 bit GIDs, introducing that will break APIs, and we can collect these things and make a 2.0 that includes all the breaking changes introduced at once. So we can avoid breaking things multiple times. 
Adam
A breaking change can have a HIGH cost, and also a breaking change indeed with a cost of adaptation that is loere. So TT VFs, we tried to utilize the kind of smaller stuff done by Apple already, then for GPOS, it was relatively easy for engineers to adapt it. I don’t know how many persona-years was used to make it work, but it seemed OK.
Renzhi Li
SO, one option is to let applications update their engine that uses a special “legacy” table and new formats can be turned over to mimic old ones. 
Peter C
Or just have 2 fonts :)
Adam
Well, STAT points to 2 fonts. Right now, desktops have a family name, as a unique handle. But can we say the NEW font has the same name, and if the app is up to speed, it can disregard the legacy. “Lato VF” or “Lato” but then how to get the static 9 instances installed the same way? Users see menus full of versions, it's hacky. We want a way to say, ‘hide the old ones’ or ‘hide the new ones.’ And font installation is a HUGE topic, that is a key idea for OS/platforms, a resource that is available system wide, to all apps, including browsers. Web fonts, you ship a different font. Ut desktops have a unique challenge, at the heart of many problems. 

John Hudson
Peter, you have been commissioned by Google and Microsoft to work on OpenType spec?
PC
Yes, 2 things, I’m working on small issues that are not technical innovations, it can address technical issues that are clarifications requested, and 2nd, extend COLR with gradient support. That will be done in a way amenable to variations - varying some of the color data. Its mainly gradient support.
JH
So avar2 is outside that. 
PC
Yes, not the current scope. 
Dave
I can speak to that. Behdad had put together a proposal when he was at Google. We heard good feedback from around the Ot community, everybody wanted it to happen and we got questions about variants. ….SVG in OT…. 
Good pilot project to reinvigorate forward movement on the MS OT project. Something small and lightweight to try and get some forward motion happening. So Peter is working on the OT specification. Now what we’ve been dealing with over the last couple months is the bigger problems in the OT development community. Current situation is not very good. Moving from no updates for years to at least a couple of updates coming for these things we’ve mentioned.
….
Lorp
So, I can track 1.8.4 simply by being a member of the CG?
DC
Its only exist for 5 minutes, LOL
PEter
Right, GF has a repo, it has an issue tracker. For now, what is the venue where COLR issues ought to be discussed. I am yet to discuss with Dave and MS folks, but as we arrive at a time to make changes to MSOT spec, I want a publicly visible way to review things. When we worked on VF, we did distribute drafts among the group, but not publicly. I want to do that this time. And at some point I did have a draft of OT spec online, just not linked, so I could send a link to preview a beta. But it was not publicized and all feedback was via email. I want to do that differently.
RLi
I am not ust proposing 32 bit GIDs. A LOT of new features! J Hudson, I iaw your ddoc that position dependent subtiation, that tangles GPOS and GSUB. That will break DRwrite, as it has 2 paths, for each. Also white on black in glyphs needs a boolean operation, that is also a breaking change. So we want to connect all severely breaking changes to make a 2.0 
Lorp
Thanks for the reminder about those 2, then, Peter’s work on COLR and clarification, then it would be really nice to start the CG of where these discussions have been or are happening, so they can move to the CG. 
Florian
We now have a public and private mailing list, that is all that is auto - anything else we need to ask. 
DCrossland
We need a repo
Peter C
Lets propose on the list what the purpose of a repo is. 
Florian
Right you can discuss hg vs git, pdfs on email.
Liang
How are pub/priv lists used?
FLorian
Private lists normally used for taxi sharing and such. 

Fantasai
/me notes that opbd doesn't seem to work for vertical text, it would be nice to add an equivalent for upright typesetting
RLi
Should we move CFF/CFF2 as a breaking change? 
Peter C
This is a very small group now...
John HHudson
I know Simon is very keen on removing old cruft, so yes, I think adding AND removing will happen in a new breaking format. If it will break stuff, do we need ANY backwards compatibility with OpenType? That is something for a group to consider. 
Lorp
“Removing postscript” is not a wise way to say it, but adding cubic splines can be fine. 
Peter C
I hear people saying “it was a mistake to include CFF2 in OT1.8”. But if MS had precluded Adobe proposing CFF2, it could have been seen as an antitrust issue. I wanted to leave the opportunity open, and let the market decide what people prefer. Same as with many color formats, OK, no consensus, lets document them all, and document which is appropriate. To say, take out PS, no, that is not the right approach. But to say ‘we have a new format with all that was available in TT and PS “and more”’ then that is different.
Benjamin Yang
Right, there are 2 proposals for either fixing the existing format(s) or developing an entirely new format in the table below. Can we compile these into a single proposal?. 
RLi
I wonder if it is worth fixing an existing format? Maybe better to put all energy into something new. 
Peter C
It is worthwhile, but can not happen quickly. A new format being defined doesn’t mean it works in many places. If it is supported only in a few places, there will be confusion in the type industry. As we saw with color. So we should ID good business cases for why a new format is valuable. And Bring a critical mass of stakhohedlers tool vendors and app vendors, to come together for a business case. It will indicate the whole industry is ready to move on. 
RLi
We can provide reference libraries, like a proven implementation, and converters to convert (a subset of) old fonts to new fonts.
Martini Hosken
We have many proposals to improve things. There's a new proposal shappening elsewhere. So I want a single list of proposals. 
Peter C
That is an outcome I want
…
...
Dave
<Overview of history of existing forums, old gh opentype org> current outcome is a W3C repo where all proposals should go, next step to request Github repos and work out how we use them. We need a new central place and based on what happened today I think the W3C is going to be that place.
Adam
What about parametric axes?
Dave
Yep. those are OK today but work better with avar2
PeterC
The MS axis registration repo didn’t progress as they weren't reviewed
Adam
So, they were too early to register, if we added those 12 axes, the font is not really usable because there is a missing thing like avar2. 
Peter C
In the process I defined, we can propose things, but I wanted to see a critical mass of activity in the community, yes, this is broadly useful in the community. So DBerlow had in his mind a clear idea that these were useful, and assumed some user contexts, and in other user contexts they can be confusing. Opsz, it can be a combination of parametric axes, but the average user saw it as a complete paradigm shift. So that set of 12 axes is not easily to be broadly absorbed by users. But with acar2, it can be useful for font developers but can then be combined with data in the font, to present something familiar and useful to content developers. Where things slowed down, we all agree avar2 will be useful, but we didn’t get past that. There were people saying “we will work on a proposal for “synthetic axes'' and nobody came up with a draft proposal to discuss.'' That is in ipart , I think, because the companies where people worked had other priorities. So there was not enough business need at the time. So I hope we can make progress on these things! 
Adam
Those companies had a lot, well, I feel like there is nice progress, companies have had to devote resources to IMPLEMENT the VFs as we proposed them 4 years ago. It is an ongoing process. To add on top of that, we track bugs fixed in the last 12 months for browsers, apps, picking up VF as they were, it's still in progress. So I am interested, is the MS axis registry dead? I don't see it dead, the proposals are published, that is good. GF commissioned axes using these axes, that is useful. In the end, the list of proposed axes is a sort of registry. Not MSOT registered, but anyone can read DB’s docs and make their VF using that paradigm. 
Peter C
So, can we start discussing axes within the CG? Sure, but it's more useful to progress to AVAR2 . Or, there is a process to discuss axes, it didn’t go anywhere, can we improve the process for new reg’d axes? A group discussed that at TYPOlabs 2018. But then people went home and had other priorities and it stopped.
Adam
So, that process and proposal to register axes, is an interesting precursor, it's another way, much more public than before, using Github etc, https://github.com/microsoft/OpenTypeDesignVariationAxisTags  to describe how we publicly vote or discuss and submit things, for a small part of the font format. It was an interesting process. I think it was worthwhile. 
John Huhdson
Well, it was good to use Github and have a public process, but the process assumed in an old fashioned way is that a formal proposal is brought up, and voted on. There is a review process and THEN it would be registered/
ADam
No collab editing? 
John
Well ... The question of scale was where EVERY discussion ground to a halt. Registered axes all used unit scales externally defined. 
Adam
And we see in opsz that it was not well defined. 
John
But it was EXTERNALLY defined. All proposals proposed an invented unit scale. DBerlow proposed all as Per Mille of Em. All his axes used a common unit scale. But I asked “what is being measured” and “what happens when you define a scale, and extend the font that make that scale no longer relevant to the user’s selection.” 
Peter
Scale as an issue, but others. The rabic justification axis was lovely but the axis needs to be incorporated into higher level layout functionality. That was the missing piece in that case. I hope we can move towards that in the coming years. 
JHH
For 6 years we discussed where OT layout interacts with line justification. And back to Eliazer’s JSTF table that is not implemented anywhere. So how OT works with line justification, and how OTVar interacts with it, 
DC
DB has demo’s https://variablefonts.typenetwork.com/topics/spacing/justification

Also GF has gone aeahd with https://github.com/google/fonts/tree/master/axisregistry and its called that to make it clear that there are latent registries in each foundry. 

So, the MS process iis stopped. I would love to see it restart. But it seems the community consensus is the real thing, and that place is as of today now the w3c.
Adam
... So, to have a place where vendors can say “we don't think it's a bad proposal, but this is hard to implement.” I remember SVG in OT discussion in the CG where PS people will say “that is difficult for US” and same as hohles in ink, thee boolean thing, we as a community HAVE done well split the process into batches; setting up boxes, filling in the boxes, moving the boxes... there are common implementations, and it amazes me, people start a NEW project, and they use ONLY freetype, because they didn’t think about font-and-text as a model that includes that depth of shaping. 

So, the idea of a single person being a spec editor seems unrealistic given the size of the scope.
Lorp
I agree, there can be a ‘general editor’ at a publishing house for a series, and each book in the series as its own editor. 
Peter C
Yes, there is a whole additional set of specs that don’t exist, that need to exist. MS made script implementation and shaping specs, that are incomplete, not always maintained, and need context... Vertical layout needs information about orientation about the text, that needs to inform the shaping at a lower level, that is not part of the shaping process. That context is brought to a set of shaping things. That is not really being done in MS shaping specs, today. The OT spec also touches on this, but it is not well fleshed out. So a broader set of docs, yes, it can be broken down. When I was at MS, I focused on aeras, not the whole thing, and recently I saw comments on EBDT table, and realized I have to familiarize myself with that table. As I read the pages, I think as the overall spec editor, I agree these are not well written specs, I can’t come to iit and understand ‘what is this, how does it work, how does the format actually get laid out in files?’ so yes I see the need to improve these things, I have to get up to speed on this area that I am not familiar with. 
Fantasai
Yes, in CSS we have this, we batch edits up. Modularizing has helped CSS a lot. But a challenge is that things get inconsistent if you don't have enough people working across all the parts. The process evolved, the people evolved, so we have people who are sufficiently general that we have scopes that overlap, me and tab cover 2/3rds each of CSS, so we have enough of an integrated perspective, but subgroup assignments can lose that. So we have telecons that discuss everything allowing the subgroups to be exposed to the areas they do not know - I now understand fonts as I've listened in and do better text work that way. 
Peter
I agree with Eric Muller saying you can’t segment stuff, it needs to be integrated as each informs the other, and impact up and down the stack can be anticipated.
Fantasai
There are CSS design patterns, and people learn from a problem being solved in 1 corner how to solve a problem ini another corner, and it's not well documented. 
Adam
How do you create a new CSS module?
PeterC
How did css move from 2 to 3?
Fantasai
Might be interested in reading http://fantasai.inkedblade.net/weblog/2011/inside-csswg/ 

CSS2 was split to modularize v3, but syncing them was not possible, so we moved to levels not versions. We moved to Github from mailing lists. We also focus on authors, so its clear what things are FOR. Readability of specs is important. 
Lorp
Name table page 
Renzhi Li 
CMAP table 4, who did that?
Peter C
Someone at Apple? Before my time at least. Greg is a good historian and can answer it.
Renzhi Li
I think it was to do with ShiftJIS
Adam
Sounds like Apple, the double byte non Unicode things, Apple did it a long time, there were a long period of Apple only encodings, Microsoft went to unicode nearly.
RLi
It was in NT3, early 90s. 
Liang Hai
We have an historian subgroup :) 
RLi
Yes, even the C64 font formats :) 
JH
We can commission Greg to tell all the stories
DC
And Beat Stamm
AT
And Sampo!
RLi
I saw a really old font, not sure, but it had interesting features like banded sidebearings. 
AT
It was Calamus, CFN, developed by DNC. I have it working on my computer in emulators. I presented this at ATYPI in Antwerp. I have a link. It shows Calamus, not moving, but screenshots. The bands, partial siebearings, was really good. Simple, not bubbles. https://youtu.be/vQG0JrqSq1k 
RLi
ALso DecoType ACE with collision boxes
DC
I was never able to track down F7 FontFolio which was on the old SUN OS.
AT
Variations have effectively happened BECAUSE of my archaeology interest. Some remembered or worked on this stuff ORIGINALLY and without them it would have been much more difficult to come up with it. That it was researched and implemented in the 90s and knowledge survived, and the MM-in-OT which set up the GPOS Device Flags to repurpose, was a legit case of old OT spec on archive.org, that Peter was able to look at OT1.2 or something, that is genuinely useful. 
Peter C
I will propose MS to get Greg to unearth eah early version and get them online. JH, were device tables tied to MM in OT?
AT
Ohh yes! MM in OT used it that way. There was a flag that said it's not a device, it's a MM table. And otvar copies that. 
PC
Oh, I also realised thha Deicetales acn be used that
AT
I found IDesin use CaretOffset to sort styles, so Roman or Italic will come first. At FontLab, this is CRAZY. We need to put a value there because some apps use them in a very particular way. I often ask WHY, what is the purpose of the STAT table exactly? I asked recently on the MPEG list. As I want to document that wll. It is crucial. To annotate it. Eg, language IDDs at the top of the name ID tale doc, you don't really need to use them. MacIDs? lol
John Huhuson
I hope a more public process will lead to clarity on this. I often go to people to say ‘wouldn't it be better to do clear segmentation on run sementations’ and they say ‘nah we already know how to do it’ but then those people other tere also say they know how to do it, but they do it differently. And this makes my job as a font maker much harder. 
RLi
Yes, even within 1 vendor tere can be several implementations that are different. So we should provide guidelines itemization, font fallback, things like that. 
PC
Yes, in the current spec, these things are scattered. Someone at MS might have written it as they were thinking they were writing how some MS product worked. They are not appropriate for a font format spec. They are often hugely anachronistic, not relevant for a while. The ‘recommendations’ chapter iis full of this stuff. Yet there are things scattered throughout others parts of the spec that are recommendations also. I wonder, should those things move into the recommendation chapter? Or tht chapter be merged? Or moved all out entirely to a new companion document. I don’t have a consulcion.
AT
I like to read MS OT spe but also the Apple TT Reference manual, which has for the shared tables a different narrative. I combine them in my head and say “oh that's how it works' and sometimes these GEMS like flag 6, ws not in the spec, but in the AAT docs, it says about flag 6 fo overalsp. I posted it to a OTvar list, Apple is using it, we should use it. It was GREET - not even in the porept TT spec, an AAT spec noted that an undefined flag was actually defined within Apple’s implementation. So we should remember that these historical docs have pieces of the story. Since OT is dominant in the last 20 years it is the most central reference, but it isn't the whole story.
PC
So as a spec writer, the format spec should be unambiguous about eh format, semantics, excel processing of the data is - all in order to have interoperability. Across implementations and across fonts. So I welcome that when OT spec was unclear and other docs helped, please file an issue on https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/typography-issues/issues :)
RLi
Can we deprecate some things? 
PC
Easy to say “this is no longer recommended for new fonts” but harder to say “platforms should no longer read this data”. Office moving from GDI to DWRite was hard, as DWrite did not have legacy stuff, and yes, the office has customers who need support for that legacy stuff. 
LRi
Right, printers are a big mess. But if we discuss font format issues, we must remember printers are REALLY old. So converting ot2 to a really old font so printers support it can help/.
PC
All but 2 CMAP formats are kind of irrelevant. Or name table, platform nameIDs and today we should have bcm47 tags from app UIs mapped to the strings.
AT
Sharing fonts can be hard, but for a font test suite, we can come up with a format for people who don't have rights to share proprietary fonts can run a tool to give a synopsis of how different fonts out there i the world have say a JSTF table. Name table non ascii string? Just to have an idea of how widely somethings were deployed. There are 200k fonts 


DCrossland
As of 13.40  https://www.w3.org/community/groups/proposed/#font-text now has 5 sponsors.

Florian Rivoal
The group has been created, join it here: https://www.w3.org/community/font-text/ 
```

