# Minutes of Meeting 10, 2021-04-06, 20:30–22:00 UTC

- Acting chair: Liang Hai
- Scribes: (collective)
- Agenda: https://github.com/w3c/font-text-cg/issues/48

## Resolutions

None

## Actions

None

## Attendance

Bobby de Vos,\* David Corbett,\* Erin McLaughlin,\* Erwin Denissen, Ian Prest,\* John Hudson,\* Josh Hadley,\* Kamile Demir, Ken Lunde, Laurence Penney,\* Liang Hai,\* Nat McCully,\* Ned Holbrook,\* Neil Patel,\* Norbert Lindenberg, Peter Constable,\* Renzhi Li, Suzuki Toshiya,\* Vladimir Levantovsky\*

\* Formal participants of the FTCG.

## Meeting notes

### 1. Self-introduction of new participants

Ken Lunde.

### 2. Review the last meeting’s minutes (note actions) [[link](https://github.com/w3c/font-text-cg/blob/main/minutes/meeting-20210309-9.md)]

- Liang: Discuss CJK punctuation spacing topic at Meeting 10.
- Liang: invite Florian, Ken Lunde (about the chws feature etc), and Koji for the CJK punctuation issue.
- Liang: Schedule next meeting with a Doodle poll. Prioritizing the aforementioned guests and Nat.

### 3. Leftover action items from meeting 8, regarding segmentation/itemization:

- Drafting a proposal that can be submitted to the Unicode Consortium for consideration.
- Liang: Start collecting test cases.

Neil Patel: Unclear what should be considered a segmentation/itemization issue.

### 4. Liang has disabled the branch protection rule that requires approving reviews for merging a PR.

### 5. Note that we’re not currently able to post anything on our [homepage](https://www.w3.org/community/font-text/) because we don’t have a chair.

### 6. Plan major agenda items for next meeting (around 20:30–22:00 UTC Tue 4 May)

### Proposals

### 7. Actionable proposals [#36]

### 8. Stalled proposals [#9] and other proposals in the [issue tracker](https://github.com/w3c/font-text-cg/issues)

### FYIs and free discussions

### 9. Informal liaison report from MPEG-OTSPEC [@vlevantovsky, [list archives](https://lists.aau.at/pipermail/mpeg-otspec/)]

John: About BASE table: https://github.com/w3c/font-text-cg/issues/23 BASE table

### 10. [Recent discussion?] Pre-reordering discretionary features [#49, @tiroj]

### 11. Allow font-size-adjust to be used in @font-face block [#51, @floratmin]

### 12. Segmenting Brahmi-derived scripts involving conjuncts [#53, @r12a]

John: This is also a CSS issue, but interacting with fonts and shaping engines. There are things you can do in CSS, such as drop cap and letter spacing. These things are very easy for Latin. The problem is how to apply these to complex scripts. Maybe you need rules to segment the text. A lot depends on how a font is made.

One possibility: If there’s a conjunct with a visible virama, you can segment that at that point. Which may not work.

Codepen showing differences in Latin between Safari, Firefox and Chrome on the same HTML+CSS: https://codepen.io/lorp/pen/KKavJVM

### 13. [21:30 UTC] Font metrics to report blanks in CJK punctuation [#45, @frivoal]

Nat: [Presenting Florian’s issue #45] Not clear which part of the glyphs are black or white. Important to know when computing the compression and overhang.

Now hijacking the issue to discuss another issue from JLReq. How to get information not available in Unicode. For the Japanese line layout, there’re new OTL features proposed for compression and spacing. Ken Lunde’s chws already exists for simple layout, not intended for sophisticated layout.

Ken Lunde: chws spec https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/typography/opentype/spec/features_ae#tag-chws

Nat: My proposal is to use ‘halt’/’vhal’ to remove all extra spacing in the glyphs as a first step in a two-step process of J layout. The second step would be accomplished in sophisticated apps by existing logic of adding back spacing by priority, etc., but in the case of simpler apps, they could use a new OTF feature that I will propose. This new feature will conditionally add back the space removed by ‘halt’, when needed, to achieve more correct line layout. I will work on the proposal and a test to see how it works with existing fonts that have ‘halt’/’vhal’.

The ‘chws’ feature is even simpler, to be used when in a single style run, and when the line edge to punctuation spacing is not a concern. I would argue this is not that often in a browser context (we should at least shoot for a higher minimum level of adherence to the JLReq there), so hopefully fonts will adopt the new feature used in combination with ‘halt’/’vhal’ for J line layout.

Ken: For those interested in a ‘chws’/’vchw’ implementation, the following CJK Type Blog article that I published nearly two years ago includes in its second numbered bullet links to a font with those features and a human-readable “features” file (the lookups for those feature are referenced in the ‘kern’ and ‘vkrn’ features so that implementations that do not support ‘chws’ and ‘vchw’ can toggle kerning to see the adjustments in action): https://ccjktype.fonts.adobe.com/2019/04/contextual-spacing-gpos-features-redux.html
…

John: Order between halt and the second feature will be important. We won’t want to specify the order for applying GPOS. May be a reason why we might need a new feature.

JSTF may already allow the prioritization of how spaces are added back.

---

Laurence Penney: What’s the process for proposing clarification for CFF/CFF2 specs?

Josh Hadley: Recently we’ve moved several Adobe specs to GitHub repos. Possibly we can use that as a channel. That might be a way.

Laurence: One simple thing is about number format. That uses en dash instead of hyphen.

Josh: https://github.com/adobe-type-tools/font-tech-notes

Peter: I believe the CFF2 spec is entirely within the OpenType 1.8 spec.

---

Laurence: ATypI is welcoming proposals for type technology conference May 3-5, 2021:
https://www.atypi.org/atypi-programming-updates-for-2021-22
