# Minutes of Meeting 7, 2021-01-12, 20:30–22:00 UTC

- Acting chair: Liang Hai
- Scribes: Liang Hai, et al.
- Agenda: https://github.com/w3c/font-text-cg/issues/39

## Resolutions

None

## Actions

1. Liang Hai: Schedule discussion of https://github.com/unicode-org/text-rendering-tests for Meeting 8; try inviting Sascha.
2. Norbert Lindenberg: Create an issue ticket for the interaction of font fallback and script/run itemization.
3. Peter Constable: Communicate with Unicode Consortium to see if script/run itemization work can be done as Unicode TC or Ad Hoc.

## Attendance

Bobby de Vos,\* Chris Lilley,\* David Corbett,\* Duncan MacMichael, Erin McLaughlin,\* Erwin Denissen, Greg Hitchcock, Ian Prest, John Hudson,\* Josh Hadley,\* Laurence Penney,\* Liang Hai,\* Ned Holbrook,\* Neil Patel,\* Norbert Lindenberg, Peter Constable,\* Renzhi Li, Vladimir Levantovsky\*

\* Formal participants of the FTCG.

## Minutes

### 1. Self-introduction of new participants

Ian: Microsoft, Edge.

Erwin: Well, I am Erwin, the founder of High-Logic. Producing a font editor for Windows. I try to keep up with new font technologies, which is challenging for a single person ;-) I am currently working on support for variable fonts and intend to do R&D for the upcoming color improvements later this year.

Peter: Small plug for Erwin: I recently needed to inspect how colour glyphs in a COLR table were defined, and FontCreator made that easy, much easier than some other tools I tried.

### 7. Informal liaison report from MPEG-OTSPEC

Vlad: Activities, not much of the list itself, but on the GitHub repo. COLR activities. Meeting happening this week. Breakout session tomorrow. Meetings are members-only, but Vlad can invite experts. This specific meeting tomorrow is working group meeting. AHG meetings are open.

Peter C: Basically a complete draft. Extensions to COLRv1. Complete enough someone can read the spec and a gist of how the new spec can work. Remaining issues are minor. 98% done.

Laurence: Process. COLRv1 being a test of how the process is working. Forgot to ping Chris Lilley. Is there anybody else / any other groups who should take a review?

### 1. Self-introduction of new participants

Erin: Type designer in the US. Usually working on Indic fonts.

### 7. Informal liaison report from MPEG-OTSPEC

Peter C: Would love to hear input from Apple, Adobe, or any other implementers.

John H: Is Adobe implementing it?

Chris: I imagine they’ll be interested. So gradients etc.

Josh: Adobe will provide feedback on spec.

### 1. Self-introduction of new participants

Neil Patel: With Jamra. Making fonts for African scripts.

IUC44 Talk. https://block-image-uploader-prod.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/f9c4abee-50a9-4f0c-8a92-757059c278d7/S8T3-Patel.pdf

### 6. Standardising run segmentation

John H:

Discussion of OTL and how to do OTL. We have table format. We don’t have spec about how table format should be implemented. Font vendors thus can’t predict how font behave.

Beginning to end. End being justification. The thing we have to do at the beginning of OTL. Script itemization and run segmentation. Formal spec and test suite. Will also be useful test case for the group. We can’t do formal tech spec but we can identify problems. Also to decide what is the appropriate channel for this, eg a new group.

We did some testing on common punctuation with Devanagari. Eg, an opening quote is not segmented into Devanagari and ending quote is. Inconsistencies like this.

Bidi text. Multiscript font with both Latin and Arabic. Parentheses around boundaries of bidi runs. Which script does a parenthesis belong to.

Create test suite. Strings to test.

Peter C: UTC assumes anything in the rendering pipeline belongs to something else. Something creeping in, like Indic shaping. Spec created for ordering Arabic marks in rendering. A new technical committee may make sense. UTC, CLDR-TC, and ICU-TC. ICU used to have rend

Liang: AMTRA is important.

John: Hebrew.

Peter C: UTR #53, Unicode Arabic Mark Rendering. https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr53/

In Unicode encoding. For combining marks, Unicode assigns “combining canonical class” (ccc) for certain processes/uses, not necessarily for other uses (eg, glyph rendering). In particular in scripts like Arabic and Hebrew, ccc values may in fact not be the most suitable for rendering. If all shaping implementations do this, it’ll simplify shaping. It’s a Unicode Technical Report, not a standard.

John H: It’ll be helpful to have a formal OTL documentation, implementing.

When something becomes a Unicode Technical Report (TRs), what aspects are the Unicode organization(s) responsible for?

Peter C: Depending on the topic. Most of the TRs are maintained by UTC. CLDR is responsible for the TR about LDML.

John H: In terms of script/run segmentation, …

Peter C: It’ll be good for …

Erwin: It might also be useful to further explain the concept of script and language in OTLF.

For example Bahnschrift has several features in Macedonian in Latin Script and some others in Cyrillic Script. That is probably a bug, which I already reported to Aaron, but it might still help to explain in what Script to include a language.

Peter C: Two issues. One is how a string is segmented into script runs; the other is under what script you can find a language.

John H: Adobe earlier limitation … We only got recently rid of duplicated lookups under other script tags.

Neil P: We still have that in fonts for Arabic scripts as well, esp newly encoded ones. End up duplicating a lot lookups under different script tags.

Peter C: …

Neil P: …

Peter C: Script neutral characters segmented into strong script runs.

John H: Newer softwares are more aware that they need to keep updated with Unicode.

Norbert L: One, font fallback. Font fallbacks often break characters into separate segments. Eg, dotted circle.

Norber L: Characters that cannot be separated from each other.

Renzhi L: Emoji. Eg smiley is supported in many fonts.

Ian P: Similar: Could we improve Han Unification/Disambiguation by considering surrounding text (rather than just relying on system properties)?

Renzhi L: Double exclamation marks are rendered as emoji by default.

Ned H: Origin sin of emojification. … macOS and iOS have different behavior based on different assumptions. Where fallback is concerned, you can imagine a system where it’s treated like Han unification, and when you encounter one, you need to reset the context.

Ian P: Does it help to use contextual info in a string to determine the locale for Han unification?

Ned H: …

Peter C: In Windows 8.1, to deal specifically with fallback of Han text.

Ian P: Say you’re on a Japanese website that doesn’t specify its language, and your system language is Chinese.

Ned H: …

Peter C: Coming back to Norbert’s topic earlier. Different implementations have different strategies for fallback, in terms of char by char basis or run by run basis.

Norbert L: … Second question: the work can start as a new Ad Hoc group.

Peter C: UTC can decide if it’s within its scope.

David Corbett: How do we segment ZWJ between two strong scripted characters that both require it.

…

Ned H: There are apparently some cases where a format control character is more strongly associated to the following character. Should document this and keep us posted.

Peter C: How should itemization and bidi level interaction. If you resolve bidi levels, then the script runs are calculated within the individual level, not across levels.

John H: That’s traditionally Microsoft’s way.

David C: HarfBuzz doesn’t do itemization.

Laurence P: Unicode has some text rendering unit tests for various platforms. (They were useful during the Variations collaboration.) Perhaps text runs can be tested. Ideally work toward an environment where text runs could be tested live on multiple platforms.

### 3. Plan major agenda items for next meeting

**ACTION:** Discuss https://github.com/unicode-org/text-rendering-tests for Meeting 8, try inviting Sascha

### 6. Standardising run segmentation

David C: Is it possible to shape across a script boundary?

John H: …

Ned H: …

**ACTION:** Norbert, interaction of font fallback with script/run itemization. An issue.

**ACTION:** Peter C, communicate with Unicode Consortium to see if script/run itemization work can be done as Unicode TC or Ad Hoc
