# Minutes of meeting 0: 2020-07-27, 13:30–14:50 GMT-4

(This was an ad-hoc meeting of the "WHAT-WG For Shaping", a precursor to
the W3C community group, consisting of interested parties in text
shaping and font technology)

* via Google Meet
* Host and facilitator: Dave Crossland
* Note taker: Dave Crossland, et al.

## Decisions

*Resolved*: Temporarily use the mpeg-otspec mailing list for discussion: https://lists.aau.at/mailman/listinfo/mpeg-otspec

*Resolved*: Next meeting August 24, same time, same length.

## Minutes

1. Who is recording this call and for what purpose?

	* Theresa O’Connor: I'd be comfortable with minutes being taken, but I'm not comfortable with it being recorded.
	* Dave Crossland: I started recording to post on YouTube as this is a public meeting, and there are people interested in the call who can not join, but don’t feel strongly
	* Simon Cozens: and he should probably get permission first. :-)
	* ?; Why is it necessary to post this on Youtube? Minutes should suffice.
	* DC: ok
	* ?: Was the meeting eventually recorded?
	* DC: No

2. Individual intros and outcomes for the group

    * Dave Crossland: Google Fonts program manager
    * Liang Hai (梁海): Work on Unicode and font development (shaping.) It is complex work and I wanted to do it well so I dived deeper, down to the Unicode level. My ambition is to rewrite the Indic chapters in the Unicode Standard’s Core Specification, and to make sure producing fonts for complex scripts is as easy as producing a Latin font.
    * Adam Twardoch: PM for Fontlab, mostly working on font editing tools. Previously on myfonts.com team, so exposed to end users of fonts there, acting as a non-Western Latin consultant, and also in touch on that for Fontlab, and I stay in touch with font and tex system engineers, I was involved in the start of the VF and SVG-in-OT efforts, and I try to moderate, to suggest ideas, to complain sometimes, and we all have an opportunity to make text shaping better - as our work effects billions of people in smart phones and the web. It's not just creative designers, also them, but also a huge number of people who interact through text. 
    * Andrew Glass: I work on keyboards at Microsoft, and have worked on fonts and shaping. I want keyboard input to stay in parity with complex script shaping; I see new encoding initiatives result in a lot of effort on fonts, but without complex input support in tandem, such as visual-to-logical input reordering is well handled, the user community may not understand and be able to correctly use the font encoding.
    * Behdad Esfahbod: I’m here to listen 
    * Ben Yang: linguist, specializing in writing systems, Director of Technology for the PanLex Project at the Long Now Foundation, interested in minority languages digital availability, and I started to look into font technology recently, and am here to observe
    * Siqin Bilige (ᠰᠡᠴᠡᠨᠪᠢᠯᠢᠭ): I can’t speak English (Liang: He works on Mongolian fonts)
    * Caleb Maclennan: I work on the SILE‌ typesetter and am mostly involved downstream from shaping on the text layout end, but do consulting work for groups trying to publish in minority scripts without good shaping or font support. 
    * Chris Chapman: I wrote text engines at Monotype and now manage font production at Adobe
    * Cosimo Lupo: I am a Google Fonts engineer and maintain fonttools
    * David Corbett: I am working on Noto Sans Duployan
    * Greg H: I am a long time Microsoft text engineer
    * Jonathan Kew: I work at Mozilla on text layout, in a past life I worked as a font developer and made my own tools
    * Marek Jeziorek: I work in Google Fonts on Noto, also here to listen
    * Nate Willis: I wrote docs for HarfBuzz (through a Mozilla grant) and for YesLogic an OpenTypeLayout implementation doc based on what HarfBuzz does, which led to the Allsorts shaper’s behavior
    * Norbert Lindenberg: I work on shaping for Brahmic scripts, my interests are similar to Liang Hai’s
    * Peter Constable: I worked for Microsoft on OpenType Spec, before that at SIL on enabling more writing systems with JKew, and am involved in Unicode
    * Renzi Li (李任之): I work at Microsoft on DireWrite, RichEdit, and text layout in terminal emulators.
    * Rod Sheeter: Google Fonts, inc Noto
    * Miles Maxfield: Text layout and rendering at Apple
    * Simon Cozens: Freelance font engineer, I started SILE a while ago, that led me down a journey  to all things font shaping
    * Tamye Riggs: ED for ATypI, work on marketing/media side of type design
    * Theresa O’Connor: Coming to this from the Web side, at Apple, on standards bodies.
    * Vlad Levantovsky: Worked for Monotype 19 years and worked on font standards; fonts should work across devices without borders, that was the goal, and we are almost there :) I am a kind of ambassador between OT community and ISO/MPEG, formal chair there, and also chair of W3C Fonts Working Group - and it's the 10 year birthday for WOFF! JKew exactly 10 years ago today, he published the working draft for WOFF 1.0 :) And web fonts are now over 80% adopted officially! I hope this continues :) 
    * Yuri: I do fontlab :) Here to follow
    * Zachary Quinn Scheuren: I worked at Monotype, 100% on Noto for 5 years, and it's an insane project where we ran into all possible issues with Unicode, OT, how it was all implemented and thought about . Happy to see Liang working on that. Nice to see some faces with some names :) Now at ADobe and working on CJK font development, also contributing to Noto to help minority groups with everything - keyboards, everything as many have said. 
    * Frederick Brennan: I am surprised and happy to be invited here, in 2018 I got started on fonts. I worked on FontForge for most of 2019, a lot of stuff there, it was a grant funded effort. In 2020 I am working on Noto for Google Fonts. I have submitted some Unicode proposals. 

3. Desired corporate outcomes (see section Proposals for details)
    * Closer coordination with the Unicode Standard, especially on complex scripts’ shaping requirements
    * Standardized shaper behavior specification 
    * Fully specifying the path from rendering API call to glyph selection and positioning, including interactions with font fallback, normalization, bidirectional layout, vertical layout, line breaking, etc.)
    * A significantly updated (or brand new if necessary) font format
    * Standardized script run segmentation (itemization) algorithm for OTL
    * Low priority: Registered glyph naming schemes and conversion 

4. Best working group form/home - ISO / W3C / Unicode Consortium / WHAT-WG style / Rust style / TC39 style…?
    * Dave Crossland: ISO has an official “Open Font Format” working group, that is obscure but is also public and open to anyone to join! ISO does not have to impose a lot of rules for how an ad hoc group is organized, and today it is mainly organized on the central mpeg mailman instance hosted by an Austrian university who used to be very active in MPEG video technology development (https://lists.aau.at/mailman/listinfo/mpeg-otspec). Before that host, the working group list was hosted on YahooGroups, so we could organize to move to eg a Github repo, a Discourse host, a section of TypeDrawers, etc - or just promote that old mailman, or ask AAU to upgrade as their mailman UI is old. Does anyone have any concerns with ISO?
    * Liang Hai: ISO / JTC1’s level of bureaucracy is concerning. It often can be a frustrating process to meet their (SC, ITTF, national bodies…) expectations about procedure and publication. Or probably SC29 is very different from SC2? Peter Constable may be able to tell us more about it… We really need a lightweight and modern decision making process.
    * DC: This is about the ‘ad hoc group’ process, rather than the actual standards process. If the ad hoc group presents consensus and the editor (most recently Vlad @ Monotype) submits the new version and there are no objections, it sails through. I hope Vlad will join the call and be able to speak to this. But if ISO is no good, Unicode or W3C seems like the next best formal hosts, and having a formal host which the big players (or rather, their legal depts) are signed off on, seems very important to me :)
    * The existing OpenType layout mailing list and github repository
    * Nathan Willis: Alliance for Open Media ( https://aomedia.org/ ) is a standalone organization created just to develop & maintain one specification - AV1 video codec (the point being that a WG can exist on its own & host a standalone spec)

5. AOB
    * Vlad: Why do we need a new group?
    * Simon: Shaping is between Fonts (OT) and Encoding (Unicode) and I’d like to see more cross fertilization. 
    * Liang: Right, scope of OT spec is not to capture all the meaningful knowledge needed. The font format is a means to implement how text can be shaped - that is what really matters. And Unicode is also not that. So the fonts as a high level protocol is not enough. OT spec can never capture that scope. Another aspect for me, is that I never participated in OT spec development, but what I heard is that the process is not functional. So, my inspiration is WHATWG, or Rust programming, there are rare successful WGs that make complex specs in rapid pace and are very implementation oriented, and driven by needs of frontier and actual implementations, and are able to deprecate what is no longer needed. They have a highly active community of developers to contribute into the spec itself. OT spec can be improved in its current situation, to make it more visible. The moderns groups have a pitch process, people can discuss and refine it, and then the patch is integrated in the spc. Variable Fonts have new axis tags proposed, but this practice needs to be expanded. Complex scripts are not complex inherently, they are complex because they are not correctly encoded. Unicode is somewhat responsible for that, but Unicode must be stable, so fonts are then responsible. The industry has failed to resolve this; there is so much information missing. Anyone contributing to Noto knows how insanely difficult it is to get a script right. For Monotype, the biggest foundry on the planet, to get a single script right for Google, and other single huge company, it's insane -should not be like this. Unicode lacks the information, and we need a place to standardize this information. It can be the OT spec, but it needs to be somewhere. We need to close a circle, and get analog text to digital and back to analog. So that the whole of text shaping is a useful world. 
    * Simon: Yes, I’ve been working in HarfBuzz to shape text, and have many genuine questions about if the text is shaped correctly; the interaction of marks and subs is not specified. OT spec does not have it, and Harfbuzz just says “what does uniscribe do” and that is just not acceptable; we need docs on what shaping looks like and what is correct/acceptable. 
    * Peter Constable: Liang mentioned WHATWG; that is not a lightweight organization. It has a lot of overhead. To get Google, MS, Mozilla, Apple, All major browser developers there, there was a  lot of legal overhead to resolve IP concerns. So depending on the outcome, a lightweight WG might work, but also might not. So let be clear on the outcomes and what buyin and input is needed from major vendors :) 2nd, to the lack of docs on shaping, Greg H and JKew can speak to this too, but I was not at the 1998 OpenType Jamboree, but an issue that arose as OT was presented, was concern that the OT spec did not specify the logic that is needed to be used when implementing a given script. So yes, this gap has existed from Day 1 of OT. Microsoft has done work to provide guidance to script implementation guides but those are split between writing shaping for text engines and for font developers.
    * Simon: Right, reading the spec the audience is not always clear and can be clarified. If you sat on this for 22 years and didn’t fix it, I am not sure if the existing group can fix it.
    * Fred B: The issue I had, I didn't know if i was too young, I didn’t know enough, but I see OT as ‘unchangeable’ and changes “just happen” and most changes are for the good, but often I do agree that there is not enough input to different groups of people. I like the idea of public pitches and a place to express needs that are not met. Ideographic description sequence seems to me like the hardest problem, so I proposed that.
    * Liang (chat): https://github.com/n8willis/opentype-shaping-documents —Btw, this is the best shaper developer oriented documentation we have today.
    * Renzi Li: Many people here joined a meeting in Seattle last year. OT data can be interpreted very differently; MATH layout is very different to text. Can we formalize a standard implementation? Font implementers can follow a default?
    * Liang Hai: Consider the USE spec and variable fonts. There is no open docs on the process, everyone is surprised to see these shiny great things but there was not enough community input, they come out from nowhere and they are great but we can not let that repeat, it is not helpful enough for the industry.
    * Vlad: Thanks! So, to my original question, it is not an alternative group, but a new missing piece for what is already available. That is something we should do, it seems universally agreed as something that is needed. So, where to develop it, ISO has an open group, it is not so easy to find, it's lost in the sea of information available. ISO has this open group, anyone can join, there is no moderation, no rules for engagement, you click, you add your name, you are a member. We do need to be open and operate in public to get a set of ideas that are agreed as the best way to proceed. But also we need to think about who we are here to serve. Most standards are for tools to be made by someone else. “Can I use this tool? Would I want to use this tool that meets this standard?” And the OT spec was published since 1998, and many people had all the information to implement it, but many did NOT because the MS ownership, any patents applicable, any protection if I am sued... those are all considered by implementations, and ISO standards have established rules for all that. Also at W3C, when W3C publishes a Recommendation, there is a strict patent policy so that all contributors agreed to and there can be no question for frivolous IP claims. So I don't see any COIs here, but that work to resolve such questions is important.
    * Peter Constable: Liang mentioned the need for openness. True. But there has to be a balance, that Vlad mentions. You mentioned VF. In 2016, if this meeting happened to discuss VF, then it would not have happened in 2016. Because the vendors involved who need to implement it, and I don’t mean Microsoft, that were essential to be on board with the development of the technology, because it would not go anywhere if it is not supported everywhere. That happened in the 1990s, VFs existing in platform specific implementations. To succeed in 2010s, it needed to be implemented everywhere, and that meant a formal org that managed the IP issues. A concern about shaping logic might be well housed in Unicode; that has sufficiently open processes for those who need it, 2, all major vendors are engaged with Unicode, how it uses IP terms, similar to ISO and there is collaboration with ISO; and 3, the shaping logic is tied to the encoding architecture, and Unicode is looking after that. So if that is the primary concern, Unicode might be the right org; not UTC, but a new technical committee.
    * Adam Twardoch: I agree with Peter and Vlad, a key point here, the legacy and IP situation with the current “SFNT housed specs” is complex. OT is copyright to Microsoft, the ISO OFF follows OT closely, Apple has copyright over TrueType, Adobe has copyright over the CFF / CFF/2 portions. And then open source implementations of said technologies licensed under libre licenses, fontforge or fonttools or harfbuzz, the code to implement “proprietary” standards is open source; the spec text is proprietary, and I myself have found that a conundrum. When producing recommendations or guidelines, often you want to reuse - largely quote, or quote and annotate - the specs. But you can’t easily do it. So what Nathan Willis has done, and what I've done for a SFNT table, it's not part of anything, an extra doc made in good faith but very fragmented. There is all this knowledge, 20 years ago, the OT list was active, only a few implementations of font layout engines, and I knew EXACTLY who to ask when I had a problem. Some of these people are retired, and they knew the code and the INTENTIONS behind the code, eg hhea caret slope is used by InDesign to sort styles, so Regular comes before Italic - how can I document this? In 2001, an OT meeting was set up to make an XML representation of OT data structures, but Eric Muller made AOTS but it didn’t go far; and in 2014 it was published under Apache 2, as Adobe co-owned the spec text with MS at that time. So, like PHP4 docs, i loved 20 years ago, the spec text was there and you can annotate it with extra knowledge that someone like Simon who wants to implement a text engine, OK, he says, I have fonts made according not only to the spec, but to all the quirks of the dominant implementations too - shaping logic is a strong example but there are other aspects - and the OT specific docs owned by MS that are not part of ISO OFF, give lightweight guidance. But today, the strongest guidance is the harfbuzz source code. This is a bit strange. So as a lightweight idea, I proposed with Simon and Dave C, to set up “Common Type” - a label for a more open place to discuss the spec and the docs. There are 2 things; the spec, the mandatory thing, but also the ADDITIONAL notes, a place for people to take something, rewrite it, explain it better, contribute back. The current fragmented situation, it is difficult and therefore people made different docs in different places, and engineers can not follow all 20 places, and so more quirks happen, and this frustrated users. So Monotype and Google behind Noto, someone might assume “these guys HAVE TO KNOW how to make these fonts” but no, there is no SECRET KNOWLEDGE that they have. And we now in 2020 have new people, younger people, who take over the jobs of the older colleagues who had the secret knowledge to the extent it exists at all, and do not carry that down. So, a common place to pool this kind of annotation would be good, and this is not actually the spec itself.
    * Norbert: The IP concern for standards is not just copyright of spec text, but patents. If someone proposes something, meanwhile files a patent secretly, its implementation, and then that person sues everyone for patent infringement.
    * Simon: And we are NOT protected today in that way with OpenType? That spec process is opaque, I don’t know of Vlad’s group, their relationship is not clear, and this seems to me like something to fix. Maybe a whole new font format will fix it, so there are no legacy IP issues. But the current situation does not make me happy and as an industry we should not be happy.
    * Vlad: Well, that issue was solved many years ago. The OT IP issue. Until 2007, OT was widely known technically, but no OEM/CE implementations touched it outside the PC world. When ISO OFF, it was 1:1 to OT 1.4, so there is NOTHING technically to learn from this doc, but then CE implementations exploded. The IP situation was unclear, for a public spec, and the exact same spec by ISO was clear. It is a clear path at ISO to licensing any RAND permissions that are needed. It's a great case study in 2 identical docs. 
    * Liang: Sure, but the OT spec scope is not complete. So many details are missing! And you have to dig everywhere. I don’t think shaping knowledge is subject to patent trolls. 
    * DC: I’m afraid that it could be. I’d like to see CommonType move to the shelter of some formal org ASAP.
    * Simon: I read the whole OT spec back to front. Some things can be more clear, some things can be made more formal. I was surprised to see the ISO doc is the same document; would have expected it to be more of a formal specification. So there is room to tighten up the wording. I’d like to do that, but not happy just to make changes and propose them to Microsoft, who will review them in a black box, maybe get back to me, maybe not. So, there is commontype.org which is AOTS with the ability to add notes using Hypothes.is service. The CMAP table spec is something I did rewrite already, but mainly this is a place for anyone to add notes to the old 1.4 spec, which I have taken on good faith from Adobe. 
    * Liang: Next meeting!
    * DC: Needs to happen
    * Vlad: ISO says you only have to disclose IP if a proposal is accepted. A proposal does not obligate the company in any way. That is important to lower the barrier for entry for engineers, they can speak without prior approval. And then if the proposal is accepted, ISO only requires RAND terms. Also, W3C has a different policy; If you have IP and you propose it, the moment you propose it, you make that IP available free of charge. (Erratum by Elika Etemad / fantasai: This is incorrect. CGs are contribution-based, but Working Group Members are obligated to the contents of a specification only after it has been published into the official spec and, except for the first public working draft which has a longer period, only after a 60-day exclusion period triggered by either a patent review draft publication or resignation of the member.) So engineers should know exactly what you are talking about, eeg legal team signed off before you say anything, and that makes it harder for orgs to join W3C. When you join a W3C WG, you promise whatever IP you have that might be useful for the group will automatically be free. That is great for implementers, but can be harder for a developer who invested significant resources in developing a new technology. The ultimate arbiter is the implementers; if they feel it's useful but the barrier to entry is too high, they will skip.
    * DC: I propose 4 weeks, same time. Aug 24. 
    * ?: Were to discuss before then?
    * Renzi Li: The Unicode list?
    * Peter C: The founding members of OT Layout wanted a forum specific in scope to people working on implemations, as the prior list was too broad, and then the VF WG founders wanted their own group because the layout group was too broad. 
    * Vlad (chat): This is the place to go to if you want to join ISO Open Font Format ad-hoc group: https://lists.aau.at/mailman/listinfo/mpeg-otspec 
    * Adam: Vlad’s suggestion is not tied to any brand/trademark, its an open public list, its a standard mailman, and it's not high traffic. 
    * DC: +1, I found it funny that Vlad said “this problem was solved 13 years ago” as it seems this is also a solved problem for the next 4 weeks
    * Vlad: Yes, this list is open to all, and we had no problems with bad behaviour. 
    * Simon: We are just discussing where to house shaping docs for now, so that sounds good to me.
    * Liang: Does the list provide any protection?
    * Vlad: No, the ISO process is that discussions are not bound, any one making a proposal, until there is an acceptance. 
    * Liang: So, lets start there and be willing to move to another place later. 
    * Vlad: Scope and venue. 

*Consensus*: Temporarily use the mpeg-otspec mailing list for discussion: https://lists.aau.at/mailman/listinfo/mpeg-otspec

6. Schedule the next meeting

*Consensus*: August 24, same time, same length 
